# Factory reset is a known loophole / failsafe

*This section is wordy because it contains an undecided problem with different options and pros and cons explained.*

## How to factory reset

While digital controls are on, factory reset using your device's settings app is impossible. Yet there exist other easy ways to factory reset an Apple device with digital controls that you have physical access to.

If you are logged into your iCloud account on the web, or have physical access to your Mac, iPhone, or iPad, you can still factory reset the device, wiping all layers of security and setting the device up as new. 

This is not a great loophole around digital controls, because to execute it you cannot restore your phone how you like it using a backup (restoring from a backup that had the layers of security would restore the layers of security, making the loophole not a loophole), so you either lose access to any apps and settings that aren’t the default, or have to take the time to manually reinstall everything (quite time consuming). 

However, this loophole does work. You could factory reset the device, which takes about half an hour, then do whatever you want to that was blocked, then when you want to return to the protected setup just factory reset again, and this time restore from the backup that had the layers of security in it. If you’re only using blocked services for a short period of time and are going to factory reset again when you’re done anyway, you probably don’t care about the settings and having all your non-stock apps during the exploit.

To execute the loophole safely, for an iPhone or iPad you’d have to back up to the Mac first OR toggle “Back Up This iPhone” off immediately after factory resetting the phone (else your phone will overwrite the backup with the protections in it with a backup of your new non-protected setup within 24 hours). For Mac you’d have to back up to an external drive using Time Machine. Then, for all devices, after you do whatever you wanted to do you can revert back to protected mode by factory resetting then restoring from backup. 

In terms of active time you must spend working on the phone (resetting and then resetting again) this is much more time consuming that just waiting for the lockbox codes (which once you have take mere seconds to use). In terms of total time this is much less time consuming, since it requires you to wait half an hour to get access (instead of 12) and then half an hour to revert to no access when you are done. Although this is a loophole, it’s not one that breaks the system badly, because you still have a half hour + half hour later of focused time and attention delay. Which is probably more than any time-wasting impulse seems worth in the moment almost all of the time (especially when just waiting 12 hours is an option), but not necessarily all of the time.

## Three ways to close the loophole

### 1. Prevent device reset
Close the physical access reset option on your Mac by using a separate Apple Account for the administrator account, activation lock (this is inconvenient because the  administrator account will become much more cumbersome to use when you do need full access, because your passwords won’t be synced to it). 
   
Close the physical access reset option on iPhone and iPad using a complicated procedure that basically consists of taking the signing entity of your Apple Configurator “organization”, removing it from keychain, and then re-importing it, so you can change its permissions to only be accessible from administrator accounts and not standard ones (this isn’t a great option because it’s quite complicated).

Close the iCloud.com reset option for all devices by blocking iCloud.com from your browser (but not your device as a whole) by blocking it using the Screen Time Access to Web Content Restricted list. (This isn’t a great option because this may not work. In the past, I’ve noticed that while Apple will let you block every other website under the sun using those settings, they won’t let you block Apple sites. You can add them to the Restricted list, but unlike everything else on that list, you’ll still be able to access them through the browser. I don’t know whether that is intended behavior or a bug and whether it’s been patched already or will be patched in the future. Blocking icloud.com using DNS settings instead will break critical functionality)

### 2. Put main Apple Account password in lockbox
Lock the password of your Apple Account in the lockbox   too (and move the recovery key to there), and delete all other traces of them. Then, even though you can wipe your devices anytime, you can’t turn them back on without access to the lockbox, since you need the Apple Account password to get through Activation Lock. (This isn’t a great option because to work, you also need to remove all ability to reset the password without having the password or recovery key. Which means disconnecting your email, phone number, and recovery contacts. You’d essentially be using your locked-up screen time apple account for the whole phone, and your main one only for FaceTime, iMessage, and app purchases. But this would mean you’d have to move everything else in iCloud to the other account. And, the account would be a whole lot less secure. If something happens to the lockbox you permanently lose access to all of your data. Right now, losing access to the lockbox just means I factory reset all my devices, and I can set the screen time and DNS stuff up from scratch with new accounts. Having the entire apple account in the lockbox is much higher risk. Of course, I could try to find multiple similar timer lockboxes from other companies for redundancy, to reduce risk (idk if identical products from other trustworthy providers exist through) but still, I’m dealing with a security risk. If I use apple pay, I’m putting access to my apple card and all of my passwords to all of my accounts in the passwords app in the hands of a bunch of random lockbox sites. Not great security. Or even if I got high and accidentally deleted the lockbox. I could permanently lose access to all of my photos and messages and emails and contacts, a genuinely catastrophic risk. Keeping Apple’s many account access redundancies in place is far safer)
   
### 3. Use full MDM solution (best)
Get a real MDM account. This is Apple’s official solution to this exact problem. Once enrolled, the device is now owned by the organization, not the iCloud account owner. This means  that after a factory reset, the moment the device connects to the internet, Apple will redownload the MDM profile (vs being a completely wiped and new device if it had just had a config on it). The only way to remove the MDM settings would be to change them from the MDM account, which I could lock behind the lockbox. (This isn’t a great option because MDM is intended for businesses, not individuals, and Apple strictly enforces that rule. To get a real MDM, they require you to have a real company registered with the state, using the email of a domain you own (and pay for), they manually check your company’s website to verify it’s legit, and they require talking to you and at least one other person who works at the company before approving you. And there (may) be fees for having a company registered (ideally the whole tech restriction setup is free). On the bright side, you could register a bullshit company pretty easily, make a bullshit website, get a domain and make a bullshit company email, get burner phone number and give them a fake name and second bullshit company email so when they call the second person in your bullshit company they’re just calling you, and you bullshit their representative about how the company is oh so legit, and then you get the MDM account. This much bullshitting may be illegal. But there could be a legal route. I found two people on reddit who said they were able to talk the representative into giving them an MDM account for their bullshit business even though they explained themselves honestly in the call, how they just wanted a full MDM to control their kids or own devices. And one website which purports to have a guide to doing this completely honestly and legally and on the level and for free (https://www.techlockdown.com/articles/managed-mode-iphone). Although it’s very complicated, time consuming, and perhaps overkill just to close a non-breaking loophole. On the one hand, it would be a true pain in the ass to set up. On the other hand, this whole system is already a true pain in the ass to set up for the first time. The reason non-companies are intentionally banned from having an MDM is because it basically breaks normal apple security by making the phone owner be not necessarily the actually owner of the phone. So like imagine if some guy put it on his girlfriend’s phone. The girlfriend could literally never remove it, even if she factory reset the device, it would be like spyware, the guy could read all her messages, delete apps remotely, literally do anything, and the only way for her to get away from it would be to purchase a new phone… so, security risk, usually only makes sense in the context of a work phone separate from your personal phone that they own and paid for and have the right to read all your work messages and see everything you do on) If I were to close the loophole, I would try my luck with the MDM solution, setting up a business that’s just me, and just explain the situation to the representative, and see what happens. Could be cool. Could even be good experience, might be able to get a job out of that if I end up experienced managing an MDM. Would be a unique “passion project” for sure.

## Is this loophole worth closing?

This loophole is an alternative way to reset the devices and wipe everything that doesn’t rely on lockboxes. This is a failsafe in case the company that hosts the lockboxes shuts down or something I don’t lose control over my own devices. Which is probably good for security. 

Even though the loophole does mean that I can bypass all layers of restrictions in half an hour, I probably won’t actually use it because it’s a pain in the ass to factory reset devices and then have to set them up from scratch. 

The loophole is also a sort of failsafe in case some sort of unpredictable urgent situation occurs and for some reason the stuff I have access to isn’t adequate. Or in a travel situation. A 30 minute wait would be much better than a 12 hour wait. Considering that, I’ll probably keep the loophole; I’ll at least keep it for the foreseeable future. Will keep this loophole documentation available for reference in case I revisit the problem.
